
David E. Goldschmidt, Ph.D.
Garrido Text

CSCI-4210-01
CSCI-6140-01
Mon/Thurs 2:00-3:50pm
Sage 3510
David E. Goldschmidt, Ph.D.

Executive Officer
Department of Computer Science
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
assignments

Homeworks are to be completed individually or as specified in the assignment description. If teams are permitted, teams must not exceed three students. Note that teamwork is not required for any assignment.

Unless otherwise noted, assignments are due by 11:59pm on the specified due date and are to be submitted via RPI LMS. Late assignments are penalized 20 points for being late. Late assignments may be submitted up to a maximum of 5 days (120 hours) after the deadline. Assignments cannot be accepted for credit after this 5-day grace period.
Compilation

For C programs (Homeworks #1 and #3), use gcc to compile your code and specify -Wall; all compiler warnings must be addressed (fixed) before submitting your assignment. Further, do not use any additional flags with gcc.

For C++ programs, use g++ to compile your code and, as with C, specify -Wall and ensure all compiler warnings are addressed (fixed) before submitting your assignment.

For Java programs, use javac to compile your code and java to execute it.

For any other language, please confirm language, version, libraries, etc. with me and the TAs first.

?hide contact information
My Office: 	Lally 209
My Office Hours: 	Mon/Thurs 12:30-1:45pm; Tues 1:00-2:50pm
NO OFFICE HOURS 4/23
EXTRA OFFICE HOURS 4/24 11:00AM-12:30PM
My Email: 	goldschmidt@gmail.com
Shigeru Imai
TA: 	Shigeru Imai
Office Hours: 	Tues 3:00-4:50PM (AE 119)
Fri 1:00-2:50PM (AE 119)
NO OFFICE HOURS 5/5-5/15
Email: 	imais@rpi.edu
Bo Yuan
TA: 	Bo Yuan
Office Hours: 	Thurs 12:00-1:50PM (AE 217)
Thurs 6:00-7:50PM (AE 217)
Email: 	yuanb@rpi.edu

Ubuntu Required

With multiple flavors of Linux available, please be sure to use Ubuntu version 14.04 LTS for homeworks. This will be the platform on which testing and grading will be performed.

Ubuntu is a free download (click here for Ubuntu download site). For installations on Windows, you do not need to re-partition your hard drive.

Homework #1 - Process Management and Shells in C

Due 11:59PM Wednesday 3/4

?show details
Homework #2 - Process Management Simulation System

Due 11:59PM Wednesday 3/18

?show details
Homework #3 - Threads in C

Due 11:59PM Wednesday 4/8

?show details
Homework #4 - Sockets-based Storage Server

Due 11:59PM Wednesday 5/13

?hide details

This assignment is to be completed individually or in teams of up to three students. Beyond your team, do not share code or review anyone else's code.

Submit your homework via RPI LMS as a single compressed and zipped file (using tar and gzip); include only source code and documentation files.

To package up your submission, use tar and gzip. More specifically, create a compressed tar file using your RCS userid, as in goldsd.tar.gz, that contains your source files (e.g. main.c and file2.c); include a readme.txt file only if necessary. Here's an example:

bash$ tar cvf goldsd.tar main.c file2.c readme.txt
main.c
file2.c
readme.txt
bash$ gzip -9 goldsd.tar

Be sure to comment your code and include all team member names in a comment at the top of each file submitted.

Purpose:
In this fourth (and final) assignment, you'll write server code to implement a storage server. You can use any language you like, as long as it compiles and runs on Ubuntu and has support for server sockets. As part of your server implementation, you will implement some fundamental memory management concepts, in particular, paging.

For your server, clients connect via TCP sockets to server port 8765 (you may hard-code this port number). Your server must not be a single-threaded iterative server or a multiplexing select-based server. Your server must use either threads or child processes for its implementation.

Your server must support clients implemented in any language (e.g. C, Java, Python, etc.). Though you only need to submit your server code, feel free to create one or more test clients. Test clients will not be provided to you. You should also use telnet and netcat to test your server.

Application-Level Protocol:
Clients connect to the server and can add, delete, and read files. Clients can also request a list of files available on the server. Note that both text and binary (e.g. image) files must be supported.

The application-level protocol between client and server is a line-based protocol (see below). Streams of bytes (characters) are transmitted between clients and your server.

Note that this protocol requires a connection-based protocol at the transport layer (i.e., TCP). Once a client is connected, your server must handle as many commands (i.e., STORE, DELETE, READ, etc.) as necessary, closing the socket connection and terminating only when it detects that the remote client side has closed its socket.

The application-level protocol must be implemented exactly as shown below:

Storage Server Commands:

STORE <filename> <bytes>\n<file-contents>
-- add <filename> to the storage server
-- if the file already exists, return an "ERROR: FILE EXISTS\n" error
-- return "ACK" if successful
-- return "ERROR: <error-description>\n" if unsuccessful


READ <filename> <byte-offset> <length>\n
-- server returns <length> bytes of the content of <filename>
   starting at <byte-offset>
-- note that this does NOT remove the file on the server
-- if the file does not exist, return an "ERROR: NO SUCH FILE\n" error
-- if the file byte range is invalid, return an "ERROR: INVALID BYTE RANGE\n" error
-- return "ACK" if successful
-- return "ERROR: <error-description>\n" if unsuccessful
-- note that the requested content may be returned using multiple ACK messages
-- if "ACK" is sent, follow it with length and data, as follows:

      ACK <bytes>\n<file-contents>


DELETE <filename>\n
-- delete file <filename> from the storage server
-- if the file does not exist, return an "ERROR: NO SUCH FILE\n" error
-- return "ACK" if successful
-- return "ERROR: <error-description>\n" if unsuccessful


DIR\n
-- server returns the list of files currently stored on the server
-- the list need not be in any specific order
-- the format of the message containing the list of files is as follows:

      <number-of-files>\n<filename1>\n<filename2>\netc.\n

-- if no files are stored, "0\n" is returned


Note that errors sent by the server adhere to the following format,
 with error-description set accordingly:

      ERROR: <error-description>\n

Expect the client to display the error description to the user.

Commands are case-sensitive and you should ensure that invalid commands received by the server do not crash the server. In general, return an "ERROR" and an error description if something is incorrect or goes wrong.

To delimit messages or message fields, note the use of newline '\n' characters. This should help to determine message boundaries.

Also note that subdirectories are not supported. A filename is simply a valid filename without any relative or absolute path specified. Be careful to stick to the protocol or else your server might not work with all clients (and with all tests we use for grading)!

You may assume that the correct number of bytes will be sent and received by client and server (and vice versa). In practice, this is not a safe assumption, but it should simplify your implementation.

Server Memory Management:
To study memory management concepts, your server must implement a non-contiguous memory allocation scheme to store file data in your running server program. Using a virtual memory approach, each file will be assigned a fixed number of frames, paging to disk as necessary. In other words, your server will cache file data in its memory by using a non-contiguous memory allocation scheme combined with paging.

First, implement a non-contiguous memory allocation scheme in your server by allocating nframes frames, where each frame is sizeframe bytes. Use default values of nframes=32 frames and sizeframe=1024 bytes, though test with other values. Given these defaults, you would allocate 32,768 bytes; you could use calloc() to do so and have an array of char of that size.

Second, set the number of frames per file, nframes to a default value of 4. This is the maximum number of frames to be allocated to each file.

Each file is sliced up into equally sized pages, where the page size sizepage equals sizeframe bytes. In other words, the page size is the same as the frame size.

To keep track of what file data is in your server's memory, implement a page table that maps pages to frames of your server's memory. For each file stored, your server should know what pages are in memory, if any. Note that all file data is stored on disk, regardless.

When a valid STORE command is received, store the file data to disk. Do not store any of the file data (i.e., pages) in your server's memory yet.

When a valid READ command is received, use your page table to determine if any of the requested data is already in your server's memory. If not, use on-demand paging to retrieve the data from disk and store in memory. Send at most one frame of data back to the client at each write() call (note that the specified byte-offset and length might not exactly fall on page boundaries).

Further, if you reach the maximum number of frames for the requested file (i.e., nframes), you need to implement a page replacement algorithm. More specifically, your algorithm needs to determine which page(s) are the victim(s) to be replaced in your server's memory.

For your page replacement algorithm, use a least-recently used (LRU) approach.

If you decide to implement a multi-threaded approach, you will need to have all threads synchronized when accessing memory.

If you decide to implement a multi-process approach, you will need to allocate memory via a shared memory segment and synchronize access to the shared memory.

Server Storage Speci